this is Shiprock peak the Sacred Heart
of Navajo Nation 27,000 square miles a
sight so beautiful it takes your breath
away but this morning we want you to
meet the real heart of Navajo Nation not
the postcard the people almost two
hundred thousand of America's first
citizens live here and their hearts are
filled with fear listen to Thomas is 71
she lives with her husband and grandkids
and like about 30 percent of the people
here they have no running water the
nearest pump miles and miles away Eugene
so is a tribal council representative
his home doesn't have running water
either he says his community is becoming
increasingly desperate with the casinos
and coal mine now closed how worried is
he
[Music]
any words
in this vast space almost 40% of the
homes have no electricity either they
are used to making do and that's lucky
because promise federal aid has only
just begun to trickle in after five
weeks of pleading for help
Navajo Nation president jonathan Nez
sometimes we feel that we travel people
tribal nations are at the bottom of the
list when it comes to limited resources
just a few days ago you told us you
hadn't received a penny
well we're hopeful that this week will
be a better week for us we're not gonna
have to roll over or we're not gonna
feel sorry for ourselves you know it
just seems alarming that the first
citizens of this country are kind of
pushed to the backburner there are
people helping the Arizona National
Guard flew and supplies a team from
Johns Hopkins center for American Indian
Health has been on the ground for more
than 30 years
Hopkins staff are now building
hand-washing stations stations are
costing us about $30 a piece to
construct they could be life-saving
these settings at this time Hopkins is
also delivering a Jami Begay
distributing supplies
this box - Helen George a traditional
weaver who is diabetic and lives alone
20 miles out of town I wash my hands
every every hour it seems like you know
she told us that she didn't have a
vehicle had we not gone out there you
know who in would have been the next
time that she would be able to get the
kind of supplies that we were able to
provide as with the local hospitals
there is a desperate need for staff says
dr. diana who
she's worked here for 35 years biggest
part of our teen that's a problem is
that we have a 30% of vacancy rate for
our nursing staff and that was before
the virus got the first wave of patients
so we kind of got the first tsunami
which overwhelmed a lot of our
capability the message from all those we
spoke to help is needed and fast promise
after promise after promise and what
we're seeing today is the accumulation
of those broken promises and where it
has left people so many times
hey NBC News viewers thanks for checking
out our YouTube channel subscribe by
clicking on that button down here and
click on any of the videos over here to
watch the latest interviews show
highlights and digital exclusives thanks
for watching